---
title: 02 - Submitting to the Quran as a Final Revelation
draft: false
tags:
  - how-islam-works
---
This is the second note on 'How Islam Works.'  This note looks at how one can submit through Quranic revelation and the distinction of the final revelation. 
## How to submit
In Surah Al-Fatihah, the Straight Path is outlined as the most urgent human need, as seen in the verse, "Guide us to the straight path" (Quran 1:6). This path encompasses making good, right, and religious choices that lead to secure and sound consequences, fulfilling the aspects of Deen. The path is further described as the one "of those who have earned Your favor" (Quran 1:7), indicating the way of past prophets who made the best choices and those who continue to follow in their footsteps. This highlights the mercy in divine guidance, as God could have left humanity to find the way on their own, but instead provided a clear path through the examples of the prophets and their followers.
## Distinguishing the final Revelation 
Preservation is a unique attribute of the final revelation because, unlike the ways of past prophets, God did not guarantee the ultimate preservation of their teachings. Historically, humans lacked the organizational strength and commitment to maintain the integrity of these teachings. Consequently, God took it upon Himself not only to reveal the guidance but also to ensure its preservation. As stated in the Quran, **"Truly, We have sent down this Reminder, and truly We shall preserve it"** (Quran 15:9). This 'Reminder' implies the preservation of both the words and their meanings, not merely the text itself. Words must convey specific meanings, and it is essential to retain the original meanings from the initial transmission to maintain the Straight Path. The Divine promise to preserve encompasses both the text and its meanings, as without preserving the original meanings, interpretations would devolve into mere speculation about what God conveyed to the Prophet. As explained by Imam Tabari, the 'Divine Promise is to preserve.' This Divine promise is integral to ensuring the authenticity and integrity of the final revelation.
## Divine wisdom in choosing Arabic
The Divine wisdom in choosing Arabic as the language of the final revelation is evident in its unique association of words with meanings, unmatched by any other language. Arabic is exceptionally precise and vast, capable of conveying specific meanings with clarity. Additionally, Arabic has been preserved meticulously over centuries. This preservation occurs through the efforts of scholars and trustworthy transmitters, ensuring the integrity of the language and the revelation. The verse, "Ask the People of Remembrance if you know not" (Quran 16:43), highlights that God addresses the people of Deen, implying that there will always be those who know the Straight Path and those who do not. It underscores the obligation (fard) to seek knowledge about religious matters from those who are knowledgeable and the communal duty (fard kifayah) to maintain a scholarly community dedicated to preserving and transmitting this knowledge.

Previous: [[01 - Reality of Religion]]
Next: [[03 - The Mainstream]]
